hey friends so today we're going to talk
about how to use tables and temp tables
in our skl projects so we're going to
understand what are tables and why they
are important and the different ways on
how to create them and then we're going
to cover several use cases and scenarios
on when to use tables in data projects
so let's get
started okay so now first let's have a
look again to the database structure we
have learned that in each SQL Server
there are multiple databases and in each
database there are multiple schemas and
now inside each schema we can Define
multiple objects like we can Define
tables and Views and now we will be
focusing on the object table and we have
learned as well we can use the language
ddl data definition language which is a
set of SQL commands in order to Define
this database structure so we can use
the SQL command create in order to
define a new table or alter in order to
update the structure or drop in order to
drop the whole table so a table is an
object in the database structure and we
have learned as well there is three
levels of the database architecture and
we have understood that at The Logical
level the middle one the conceptual
level we deal as application developer
or data engineer with the tables so we
Define tables and relationship between
them so if you are an end user or a
business analyst it's going to be little
bit more hard to work with the tables
you have to be a developer or a data
engineer but to work working with tables
it's way easier than working with the
complexity of the database at the
physical level so you don't have to be a
database expert or administrator to work
with tables so the difficulty here is
like in the middle the abstraction is
not that low but as well not that high
so now let's answer the question what
are tables a database table is a
structured collection of data it's like
a simple Grid or spreadsheets that you
might find in Excel so it has different
columns like each column represent a fi
like the ID name country and the table
has as well multiple rows and each row
represent a record or an entry of the
data so for example if this table is
about the employees then each record
each row is one employee now the
intersect between the rows and columns
we call it a cell and a cell is a single
piece of data now the whole table going
to be stored physically in the database
as database files so they are in the
database like multiple files that are
holding the informations about the table
and those files are stored physically in
that disk storage of the database so
that means your data inside the tables
are not stored like spreadsheet like an
Excel but they are stored in special
database files that usual developers and
end users don't have access to those
files so tables again it's like an
abstraction and representation for the
actual data that are in the files so
actually each time you are querying the
database table the database has to go to
those files and Fitch the data for you
all right so this is what we mean with
database
tables okay so now we have like
different types of tables in SQL we have
tables that stays forever we call it
permanent tables so they stay as long as
you don't drop them and you have another
type of tables they called the temporary
tables and those tables going to be
deleted and dropped once the session
ends so now we're going to focus first
on the first type that tables and there
are two ways on how to create them the
first way is the classical way where you
create table from the scratch and then
you go and insert your data so we call
it create insert and the other way
called ctas create table as select it's
going to create as well a table but
based on SQL query so let's understand
the differences between
them the create insert method is the
classical way on how we Define and
create tables in SQL where first we have
to go and create the table and Define
the structure and after that we insert
our data into the database table where
the other method the ctas create table
as select this one going to create a new
table as well but this time based on the
result of SQL query so let's understand
what this means okay so now to the first
method create insert so here we have two
steps the first step is we have addl
statements where we use the command
creates so once we execute the first
step what's going to happen the database
engine going to go and create for us an
empty table it is a brand new table
where we can hold our data so with that
we have defined the structure of our
table but it's still an empty table so
now in the next step we have to go and
insert our data inside this new table so
our data can come from multiple sources
like a CSV file or maybe completely from
another database where we are doing
migration or maybe you are inserting
manually your data or maybe it come from
from an application or you are doing
data migration from one database to
another so at the end once you execute
insert what's going to happen your data
going to be inserted in this new table
so in this method we have like two steps
first we Define the structure of the
table and the second step we take care
of inserting our data inside the table
and now this new table and your data
going to be persisted permanently now
let's check the other method the C here
it's only one step where you define
query and once you execute this query
what's going to happen the database has
to retrieve the data from another table
so it might retrieve data from our new
table that we just created using Create
insert so once the query is executed we
will get a result so now what the
database going to do going to create a
new brand table but this time the
definition and the data of this new
table it doesn't come from any
definition that we specify it comes from
the result of the query so whatever ever
structure that we have in the results
it's going to be reflected in our new
table so again the definition and the
data that we see in this new table comes
one to one from the result of our query
so in this type we don't have to Define
anything or to insert any data we are
just writing a query and the output of
this query going to define the table but
in this method as you can see it always
needs a database table in order to
execute the query but the create insert
method we are creating something from
the scratch so these are the two
different ways on how you create tables
in SQL and the differences between
them okay so now you might ask you know
what the ctas are very similar to the
views we have a query and the output of
this query going to be like an object in
the database so what are the differences
between them let's check this now let's
say that in our database we have a table
that has three columns ABC and now what
we can do we can go and create a view
based on a query so you create the ddl
statement in order to create the view in
the database and of course the database
going to go and store the query in the
database and it's going to be empty so
there will be no data because views does
not store any data and the query of the
view will not be yet executed but now in
the other hand if you go and create a
table using C so here again we have a
query attached to the object to the
table so here what happens the database
has to execute the query in order to
understand the structure and as well the
data that should be inserted inside the
table so our SQL query going to be
executed and the result of the query
going to be inserted inside the table so
this means this new table is storing
already the result of the query so now
this is the first differences between
the table and view as you create view
the query will not be executed and we
don't have anything about the result of
the query where in the CT we have
already result of the query stored
inside the table and everything is
prepared so now let's see what's going
to happen once the user select something
from The View so now the database going
to go for the first time executing the
query of the view in order to fit the
data from the original table and then
present it as a result for the user but
now in the other hand if the user go and
query the table that is Created from the
ctas so now what can to happen SQL will
not execute again the query of the C
because the database already done that
and prepared everything so that means we
are not querying anything from the
original table and the data can be
directly fetched from the new table so
the users going to get immediately the
result from our table that is Created
from the cdis so here comes the second
difference between the tables and Views
the views are slower than ctis and
that's because the database has here an
extra task it must execute the query of
the view in order to get the data but in
the ctis the query going to be faster
than the view do because we have already
executed everything and prepared it for
the user so that's why tables from ctas
are way faster than views and now there
is another difference and perspective
about this which is from my point of
view is more important than performance
so now let's say that in the next day we
are doing data updates on the original
table like we are doing updates on the
column C and as well in the column P so
now let's see what this means for the
user if they are using views so the user
in the next day is executing again the
same query and again here the database
has to execute the query of the view in
order to fit the data from the original
table so that means today in the views
we are getting different data than
yesterday because we have new data and
new updates and the user in the result
going to see as well the new updates and
the fresh data so the user is seeing
exactly the status of the data in the
original tables but now let's see what
going to happen if the user go and query
the table from the ctas so in the table
of the ctas we are still having the data
from yesterday all those new updates
from the original data will not be
reflected in this new table because once
the user select something from this
table the database will not go and query
or fetch the new changes from the
original table because we have already
prepared the data from yesterday so that
means our user now is getting all data
from the CT table and the only way to
get new fresh data from the ctas is to
reexecute
the CTS query and of course this is
another step and it is harder to
maintain the table from the CT and this
is a big difference for the users
between the views and the tables from
the CT now think about views you are
ordering a pizza at restaurants so every
time you are quering the view you are
placing an order the chef going to go
and make your pizza from the scratch
using the freshest ingredients so that
means you are always getting a fresh hot
pizza and think about the C is as like a
frozen pizza from a grocery store the
pizza was prepared earlier and stored in
the freezer and if you want to eat it
you have to go and heat it up in the
oven but it's still not like a fresh
pizza that is made on the spot and from
the scratch now I made myself hungry
because I love pizza so I think I'm
going to go for a quick break
[Music]
okay so now let's check quickly the
syntax of those two methods the first
one is create insert so first step we
have to go and create a table using a
ddl statements so we use the command
create and then we have to tell SQL are
we creating a table or view in this
scenario we are creating a table and
then we specify the name of the table
then after that we have two parentheses
and inside them we make a list of all
columns that we need inside this table
so we have two columns the ID and the
name and after that we are defining the
data type of those columns and maybe as
well the length there are a lot of
options that we can add to this syntax
but now we are just checking the
simplest form of creating a table now
the next step of that we need an insert
statements so we are saying insert into
our new table the following values we
are inserting the ID number one and the
value for the name going to be frank so
this is a classical way on creating new
table and inserting data to it now let's
move to the second method the ctas now
this time we have an SQL query like
select from where and some extra logic
so this is our query and then we're
going to go and put our query inside it
didl statements it's like we have done
it in the views it's exactly like we
have done it in the views but this time
instead of saying view we're going to
say table so again we have the create
command and we are creating a table then
the name of the table and then we say as
and then we have two parentheses and
inside then we have our query and this
is where the name come from
create table as select ctas so it is
very simple in one statement you have
everything you are creating a new table
and as well you are inserting the data
that comes from this query now this
syntax is used in databases like MySQL
bosis and Oracle but in MySQL we have
like a shorter way on how to do it again
we have our query select from where but
now in SQL Server we can insert a
command
between the select and from like this so
we are saying select the following
columns into new table so we have this
keyword into then the table name and
then you continue after that with your
query from whereare aggregations and so
on so here it's like the ddl is inside
your query itself but in the other
databases you're going to have like the
query is separated from the ddl
statements personally I prefer this
syntax than having this into because if
you have like big complex query this can
be really hard to see and to miss the
column selection so this is the syntax
of creating a new table from a query the
ctas in different
databases okay so now we're going to
check the scenarios and use cases where
it makes sense to use ctas so let's
start with the first one now we have
learned before it makes sense to have a
complex logic stored inside the database
so that our end users don't have to keep
repeating the logic over and over and
it's as well maybe complicated for some
users so that's why we have used views
and the result of the view going to be
used from our users so everything can
stay easy and friendly to consume for
our users but now what might happen is
that the logic of the view could be very
complicated and needs a lot of time to
be executed from the database so it
takes really long time until we get the
intermediate result from the database so
that means if it going to takes 30
minutes then each user has to wait 30
minutes until the query is executed and
none of your users going to be happy
with this situation in this scenario if
this happens you have to try maybe to
optimize the query but if you cannot do
anything about that you have to switch
the view to ctas table so now what you
have to do you have to take the same
logic and then put it in ctas so that
the intermediate results are stored in a
table and of course at the moment of
creating the table it will take 30
minutes it will take long time because
it is the same query and the database
going to need the time until creating
the intermediate results but the big
advantage of that once everything is
prepared maybe at the night at the
morning once your users are like online
and start querying the data they have
everything prepared so the user is going
to go and start selecting and analyzing
the intermediate result but this time
using the table that you have created
from the ctas and the response time
going to be for all users again normal
and fast so if you have a scenario where
your views are very slow you have to go
and prepare the data at the night using
the ctis and prepare the tables to be
analyzed from the end users so this is
the most common use case for the ctis
and this scenario happens a lot in
projects where you decide to go instead
of views to go with the ctis in order to
have resistance data and you gain
performance okay so finally back to your
SQL let's go and create a table using
ctas now we're going to go and create
create a table that shows the total
number of orders for each month let's go
and do it so first what do we need we
need a query so let's write it select
I'm going to go with the date name in
order to get the name of the month from
our order dates and we're going to call
it order month and then we're going to
go and aggregate the data by counting
the order ID for total
orders from our table sales orders and
don't forget to group by our month so
something like this let's go and execute
it so the result is very simple we have
the order month and the total orders so
we have two columns and three rows so we
have our query and of course we didn't
create anything yet now in SQL server in
order to create a table from the query
what we're going to do exactly before
the from we're going to write into and
now we have to specify the schema and
the table name I'm going to stay with
the schema sales and I'm going to call
it monthly
orders like this so that means we have
our query and the ddl is exactly between
the from and select so now if I go and
excute this what going to happen we will
not see here the result of the query
we're going to get here like three rows
affected because this is a ddl statement
it is not anymore a query and the datab
base is telling us I have created now a
table with three rows so now if you
check our tables we don't see it yet
let's go and refresh and check again the
tables now we can see our table here
sales monthly orders now of course we
have to go and check whether everything
is fine so let's go and select the rows
from our new table sales monthly
orders so let's go select it first and
execute and now we can see again the
result of our query but we are not
writing you the quer we are just
selecting it from the table so our data
is stored in our table and we can go and
check the structure of this table so if
you go to the columns you can see we
have here the order month and the total
orders and those informations comes from
our query so SQL is seeing here the
order month is a varar which is correct
because here we have the names of the
month so SQL is able to define the data
type of the table from our query and the
second column the total orders it is an
integer and that's because we have here
numbers so as you can see SQL is
defining the structure of the table
based on the result of our query over
here and of course the data inside the
table comes as well from the query and
the result of this table going to stay
like this as long as you don't change
anything so if you go and close this and
open it after one year it going to show
exact same results so it's going to live
in the database as long as you don't
drop this table but if things change in
the table orders this table will not be
updated automatically like we have
learned in the views so now if you want
to say you know what I would like to go
and drop this table well it is very
simple just go and say drop table and a
table name over here so make sure you
select it and execute it and now if you
go over here and refresh oh let's check
the tables you can see here the table is
dropped and now if you say you know what
let's go and refresh the table that come
from the ctas every day so that we
always get a fresh data inside this
table so now let's go and execute again
our CTS and with that if we go and
refresh we're going to find again our
table inside it now if you go and
execute it one more time in order to
refresh the data of the table what
you're going to get you're going to get
an error the database going to tell you
we have already this table so we cannot
recreate it so now the question is how
we can update the the content of this
table well we have to go and drop it
first and then recreate it and if you
want to put everything in one statements
we have to go and use the tsql it is
transactsql it's like extension where
you can do some programming inside the
scale so in order to do that what we're
going to do we're going to go at the
start over here and we're going to make
an F logic so we're going to go and
search for the objects so we're going to
say if the object ID and now we have to
go and specify the name of this object
together with the schema make sure to
select everything sales monthly order
and put it inside here and then we have
to define the type of this object and
here we're going to go with you it is
user defined table so we are saying if
the object sales monthly orders is not
null so that means it exist so what you
want to do we have to go and drop it I'm
going to take the statement from here
and then we're going to put it after the
F over here so we are saying if this
table exist then drop the table
otherwise don't do anything because we
don't have any new table and the query
going to work and at the end of the tsql
we have a go in order to say the tsql is
done and then our usual query after all
that so let's go and execute the whole
thing and as you can see it is working
so what happens the database did find
this table and drop it and then executed
our query so if you keep executing this
you are just refreshing the content of
this table so this is how we work with
the CT in
SQL all right moving on to another
common use case for the ctas that I
usually use as well in my projects we
use ctas in order to create a persistent
snapshot of the data at specific time in
order to analyze data quality issue so
let's understand what this means now in
some scenarios you have like a table and
you are analyzing an issue so there is
like a data equality issue at your data
and you are analyzing this scenario in
order to understand why it happens but
the problem is that at the same time
there will be updates on the table and
your data is changing so there will be
updates maybe on some fields or you are
getting new records and everything is
getting mixed up and you will not be
able to analyze the scenario where the
data quality issue happened so now it's
almost impossible to find the RO cause
of your issue but instead of that what
we do if we have like an issue of the
data we go and create a fixed persistent
snapshot of the data in a separate table
using ctis so that we make sure nothing
is changing and everything is fixed and
with that I can keep doing my analysis
on the same data without the worry that
data are getting changed so this is
another way why we use CTS in projects
to make sure that we have snapshot of
the data to ensure that our analyzis are
done on the same scenario that caes the
pack and going to be used as a
foundation for finding the problem and
fixing
it all right moving on to another use
case of the ctas we can use it in order
to create our data Mars to make it
physical data Mar instead of virtual
data Mars using views so let's
understand what this means now as we
learned before if you have a data
warehouse system our data warehouse
layer going to store the data inside
tables but for the second layer the data
Mar we can go and use views in order to
have Dynamic and flexibility in order to
generate multiple data Mars and we
called it the virtual layer but now in
some scenarios if things get complicated
your data Mark and reports going to be
slow because there for each action you
are generating a query so so the powerbi
reports and dashboards are creating
queries in your data Mars and your data
Mars have always to go to the data
warehouse in order to retrieve the data
for the reports and the whole thing
could take minutes or maybe sometimes
hours so in these scenarios we cannot
stay using views because they are
slowing everything down but instead of
that we have to convert our data Mark to
a physical layer that means instead of
using views we have to go and use tables
and one very common way in order to
generate the tables of the data Mars on
daily basis is to use ctas queries
between the data warehouse layer and the
data Mar layer it's still going to take
maybe 30 minutes that's why you can go
and prepare the data at the night but at
the reporting layer where things and the
performance really matters the
performance going to be better because
the response time from the tables is way
faster than views and the reports don't
have always to waste time waiting for
the data marks to get data from the
warehouse so this is another use case
where you use ctas where the views at
the Ms are slow and we have to go and
replace them with Stables using CT to
speed up things but still my
recommendation here is that start first
with the views so create a virtual data
Mart using views because the
implementation going to be very Dynamic
and fast and you are always getting
fresh data from the warehouse but maybe
later if you notice okay some data Mars
and models are complex then maybe go and
replace few marks from views to tables
using ctis so this is another use case
for the CT and it is is nice work around
for your data warehouse system if you
like this video and you want me to
create more content like this I'm going
to really appreciate it if you support
the channel by subscribing liking
sharing commenting all those stuff going
to help the Channel with the YouTube
algorithm and as well my content going
to reach the others so thank you so much
for watching and I will see you in the
next tutorial bye